---
name: John Githongo
image: githongo.jpg
---
John Githongo is the CEO of Inuka Kenya Ni Sisi! Ltd, a non-governmental organisation involved in governance issues broadly defined, corruption specifically, with an emphasis on working with and for ordinary Kenyans – youth in particular. In doing this Inuka is guided by the principles of heshima (respect), diversity (celebrating the depth and wealth of Kenya’s cultural diversity) and Ni Sisi! (It is us!) – for it is Kenyans who own and will ultimately resolve even the most seemingly intractable of their problems. John is also a past Chairman of the Africa Institute for Governing with Integrity; Executive Vice Chair of the Mathare Youth Sports Association (MYSA); Chair board member of the Africa Center for Open Governance (AFRICOG); and between 2011 and 2015 was a Commissioner of the Independent Commission on Aid Impact (ICAI) of the British government. Previously, he served as Vice President of World Vision, Senior Associate Member, St Antony’s College Oxford; Permanent Secretary in the Office of the President in charge of Governance and Ethics of the Kenya Government; board member Transparency International, Berlin, CEO Transparency International Kenya and a board member of the Kenya Human Rights Commission. In the past he has been a columnist for the EastAfrican, Associate Editor, Executive magazine; and a correspondent for the Economist. He remains a weekly columnist for the Star in Kenya and occasionally for other international press such the Guardian and YaleGlobal. In 2004 the German President awarded him the German-Afrika Prize for Leadership. In 2011 he was selected as one of the world’s 100 most influential Africans by New African magazine and one of the world’s top 100 global thinkers by Foreign Policy magazine. In 2012 he was short-listed, alongside US Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton for the prestigious Tipperary International Peace Award. In October, 2013 he was awarded the OXI! Award by the Washington Oxi Day Foundation that marks heroism and the defense of freedom. In 2015 he was appointed Mimi and Peter E. Haas, Distinguished Visitor at Stanford University. He delivered the 2015 Yale University Annual Coca Cola lecture. In 2015 together with the Angolan journalist and activist Rafael Maques he was awarded the prestigious University of British Columbia, Peter A. Allard School of Law Prize for international Integrity. John is also a Senior Advisor to the Office of the President of South Sudan on governance.  He holds an honours degree in Economics and Philosophy from the University of Wales and an Honorary Doctorate from the Open University.